for the problem of dimensionality
reduction by far the most popular by far
the most commonly used algorithm is
something called principal components
analysis or PCA in this video like to
start talking about the problem
formulation for PCA in other words let's
try to formulate precisely exactly what
we would like PCA to do let's say we
have a data set like this so this is a
data set of examples X in R 2 and let's
say I want to reduce the dimension of
the data from two-dimensional to
one-dimensional in other words I would
like to find a line onto which to
project the data so what seems like a
good line to put onto which the
projected data it seems like it's line
like this might be a pretty good choice
and the reason we think this might be a
good choice is that if you look at where
the projected versions of the points go
so I take this point and you projected
down here get that this point is
projected here to here to here to here
what we find is that the distance
between each point and the projected
version is pretty small that is the
these are blue line segments are pretty
short so what PCA does formally is it
tries to find a lower dimensional
surface really align in this case onto
which to project the data so that the
sum of squares of these little blue line
segments is minimized the length of
those blue line segments that sometimes
also called the projection error and so
what PCA does is it tries to find the
surface onto which to project the data
so as to minimize that as an aside on
before applying PCA is good standard
practice to first perform mean
normalization and feature scaling so
that the features x1 and x2 should have
you know 0 mean and should have a
comparable ranges of values I've already
done this for this example well come
back to this later and talk more about
feature scaling and mean normalization
in a Khan
the PC Anita but coming back to this
example in contrast to the red line that
I just drew here's a different line onto
which I could project my data it's this
magenta line and as you can see you know
this magenta line is a much worse
direction onto which to project my data
right so to project my data onto the
magenta line the other set of points
like that and the projection errors that
is DS on blue line segments will be huge
so these points have to move a huge
distance in order to get onto the UM in
order to get projected onto the magenta
line and so that's why our pca principal
components analysis we choose something
like the red line rather than like the
magenta line down here let's write out
the pca problem a little more formally
the goal of PCA if we want to reduce
data from two-dimensional to
one-dimensional is we're going to try to
find a vector that is a vector UI which
is going to be an RN so there will be an
r2 in this case but find the direction
onto which to project the data so to
minimize projection everyone so so in
this example I'm hoping that PCA will
find this vector which I'm going to call
you one so that when I project the data
onto the line that you know I define by
extending out this vector I end up with
pretty small reconstruction errors and
- that looks like this and by the way I
should mention that I'm where the PCA
gives me u 1 or negative u 1 doesn't
answer so if it gives me a positive
actor in this direction that's fine if
it gives me so the opposite vector
facing in the opposite direction like so
that would be like minus u 1 straw the
influence day if whether it gives me
positive u 1 or negative zu do you want
it doesn't matter because each of these
vectors defines the same red line onto
which I'm projecting my data so this is
a case of reducing data from
two-dimensional to one-dimensional in
the more general case we have n
dimensional data and we'll want to
reduce it to K dimensions in that case
we want to find not just a single vector
onto which to project the data we want
to find K dimensions onto which to
project the data so as to minimize this
projection error so here's an example if
I have a 3d point cloud like this then
maybe what I want to do is find vectors
so find the pair of vectors and I'm
going to call these vectors let's draw
these in red I'm going to find a pair of
vectors since I'm from the origin here's
u1 and here's my second vector u 2 and
together these two vectors define a
plane or they define a 2d surface right
like this sort of 2d surface onto which
I'm going to project my data for the
Steve they're not familiar with linear
algebra photos the other really experts
in linear algebra the formal definition
of this is that we're going to find the
other set of vectors u 1 u 2 maybe up to
UK and what we're going to do is project
the data onto the linear subspace
spanned by this set of K vectors but if
you're not from the familiar with linear
algebra just think of it as finding K
directions instead of just one direction
onto which to project the data so
finding a K dimensional surface really
finding a 2d plane in
this case I've shown in this figure
we're wrong we can define the position
of the points in a plane using K
directions that's why for PCA we want to
find K vectors onto which to project the
data and so more formally in PCA what we
want to do is find this way to project
the data so as to minimize the sort of a
projection distance which is the
distance between points and projections
and so in this video example 2 given the
point we would take the point and
project it onto this on 2d surface we
end up with that and so the projection
error would be you know the distance
between the point and where it gets
projected down to my 2d surface and so
what PCA does is I'll try to find the
line or a plane or whatever onto which
the projected data to try to minimize
that square projection that 90 degree or
that orthogonal projection error finally
one question that sometimes get asked is
how does PCA relate to linear regression
because when explaining PCA I sometimes
in the drawing diagrams like these and
that looks a little bit like linear
regression it turns out PCA is not the
linear regression and despite some
cosmetic similarity these are actually
totally different algorithms if we were
doing linear regression what we would do
would be on the Left we will be trying
to predict the value of some variable Y
given some input features X and so
linear regression what we're doing is
we're fitting a straight line so as to
minimize the squared error between a
point and the straight line and so we're
minimizing would be the squared
magnitude of these blue lines and notice
I'm drawing these blue lines vertically
director these blue lines are the
vertical distance between a point and
the value predicted by the hypothesis
whereas in contrast in PCA what it does
is it tries to minimize the magnitude of
these blue lines which are you know
drawn at an angle these are really the
shortest orthogonal distances the
shortest distance between the point X
and this red line and this gives very
different effects depending on the data
set and more generally and more
generally when you're doing linear
regression there is this distinguish
variable Y they were trying to predict
that all that linear regression is about
taking all the values of X and trying to
use that to predict Y whereas in PCA you
know there is no distinguish or there is
no special variable Y that we're trying
to predict and instead we have a list of
features x1 x2 and so on up to xn and
all of these features are treated
equally so now one of them is special as
one last example if I have three
dimensional data and I want to reduce
data from 3d to 2d so we really want to
find two directions
you know u1 and u2 onto which to project
my data then what I have is I have three
features x1 x2 x3 and all of these are
treated alike all of these are treated
so symmetrically and there's no special
variable wide and I'm trying to predict
and so PCA is not a linear regression
and when you and even though at some
cosmetic level they might look related
these are actually very different
algorithms
so hopefully you now understand what pca
is doing is trying to find a lower
dimensional surface onto which to
project the data so as to minimize this
a squared projection error to minimize
the squared distance between each point
and the location of where it gets
projected in the next video we'll start
to talk about how to actually find this
lower dimensional surface onto which to
project the data